Introduction:

In the beginning of our work with the Sustainability Clinic we were provided with a litter survey toolkit, courtesy of the Climate Crisis Action Lab. As per the recommendations of the River Foss Society, this toolkit was deemed to be overly technical and unsuitable for the needs of the River Foss Society; so, it became the duty of our group to develop and apply a new, simpler, and more versatile tool to achieve our goals in surveying the litter of the River Foss.

Methodology:

To create the new and improved toolkit we focused our efforts on achieving two main objectives. Firstly, we sought to create a toolkit that was easily accessible and applicable to the general public; with this in mind, we created our toolkit with the intent that York residents may take it upon themselves to carry out surveys of their own using the toolkit. Secondly, it was necessary to create a toolkit that was sufficient in its ability to accurately capture the state of litter pollution regarding the River Foss.
The toolkit outlines eight different categories of litter for recording: food packaging, food, drinks packaging, dog waste bags, clothing, small sized miscellaneous litter, medium sized miscellaneous litter, and large sized miscellaneous litter. The length of the River Foss is divided into thirteen sections, beginning with York city centre and terminating in Haxby; each of these sections is given a letter designation on the toolkit. The total distance covered by the toolkit is 6 ½ miles.

Results:


As a group we conducted a total of five surveys along the River Foss, covering half of the distance on each occasion: three walks surveying the first 3 ¼ miles of the distance from York city centre to New Earswick, and two walks surveying the final 3 ¼ miles of the distance from New Earswick to Haxby. Along the distance of the River Foss, a total of thirteen bins were recorded: two in section A, one in section D, one in section E, one in section F, two in section H, four in section I, one in section K, and one in section M. Of the recorded litter, corresponding with the categories set out in the toolkit, the litter was distinguished between litter found in the River Foss and litter found on the riverbank. In the river, the following results were recorded: sixty percent drinks packaging, one percent food, two percent dog waste bags, one percent clothing, ten percent small miscellaneous litter, eight percent medium miscellaneous litter, ten percent large miscellaneous litter, and eight percent food packaging. On the riverbank, the following results were recorded: thirty percent drinks packaging, one percent food, eight percent dog waste bags, one percent clothing, thirty-five percent small miscellaneous litter, seven percent medium miscellaneous litter, three percent large miscellaneous litter, and fourteen percent food packaging. In regards to the severity of litter surveyed per each section along the River Foss, a scoring scale was used from one to five to identify hotspots, with a lower limit of one representing a minimal amount of litter and an upper limit of five representing a high amount of litter. For the results of litter found in the river, the following scores were given. The sections to receive a score of one were sections A and C. The sections to receive a score of two were sections F and H. The sections to receive a score of three were sections D, G, I and M. The sections to receive a score of four were sections B, J, K, and L. No sections were given a score of five for litter in the river. For the results of litter found on the riverbank, the following scores were given. The sections to receive a score of one were sections H, K, and M. The sections to receive a score of two were sections C, D, G, and J. The sections to receive a score of three were sections F, I, and L. No sections were given a score of four for litter on the riverbank. The sections to receive a score of five were sections A and B.

Analysis and Recommendations:


From the results of the survey, we can see a correlation between bin placements and litter hotspots. For litter found in the river and on the riverbank, high scores of four and five were given for section B. No bins were recorded as being placed in section B. On the other hand, we can see how a larger number of bins helps maintain a more moderate amount of litter. For both litter found in the river and on the riverbank, a moderate score of three was given for section I. Four bins were recorded as being placed in section I. 
What we can also see from this data is that even a high placement of bins does not eliminate litter or reduce the amount of litter to a minimal amount. We have come to believe that this is due to the visibility of the bins and the spacing of the bins; additionally, we have come to believe that the absence of designated recycling bins contributed to the excess of recyclable material based litter such as drink packaging. Therefore, it would prove useful to improve the visibility of the bins through brighter colouration, as the bins in their current state suffer from a lack of visibility due to their dark colouration amongst the city architecture and natural surroundings. Visibility may also be improved through the implementation of signage leading pedestrians to the locations of bins. In a study entitled Green Footprints, a similar project was put into practice where green footprints were placed upon the ground guiding pedestrians towards bin locations. In the UK, this project led to a 16% reduction in litter, most notably in parks and recreational zones. 

A second study considered entitled Reducing Littering In The New Forest approached the aim of reducing litter by appealing to residents’ pride in their local environment with informative signage and caches of reusable litter bags throughout the New Forest. This resulted in a 29% reduction in litter. From our own data, we noticed a similar phenomenon regarding section C. This section received low scores of one and two for litter severity. In this section we explored the Foss Fairy Trail, where local residents decorated and designed the trail with trinkets and signage to better improve the aesthetics of that section of the River Foss. This shows the effectiveness of what is called in criminology the Broken Windows Theory. This theory states that visible signs of an area of concern, in our case litter, leads to a further increase in that same area of concern. Shown in both the New Forest study and our surveying of the Foss Fairy Trail, we can see how an improvement in the general aesthetics of the area and appealing to local pride of the area through means such as signage can lead to a reduction in litter. On the contrary, areas with little community development, such as sections of the River Foss extending further through Huntington, were found to be on the higher end of severity in our litter survey.
